[decision] copy-on-write (round 2) (#4678)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/1_in_discussion/copy_on_write.md

## Constraints

> 1. Elektra's public API should require no changes

Reviewer: I think we should add an constraint that the life-time of KeySets also must be as expected. (And not be related to kdbClose).

Reviewer 2: Again, what is "expected"?

I'd say: "The liftime of a `Key` and a `KeySet` must be unaffected by COW".

> 2. Modifying keys and keysets returned by `kdbGet` should work as expected

Reviewer 2: I think it was removed, because I said in the last PR that "expected" is too vague. Without stating what is expected, this constraint is meaningless, everybody could add their own expectations.

- `ksLookup()`:
  - if the `DEL` or `POP` flag is specified, do the COW-stuff as described multiple times now in the operations above

#### Reference Counting

We need reference counting for the internal COW datastructures.

> For the beginning, we can just do it the same way reference counting currently works for `Key` and `KeySet`.

Reviewer: Please avoid such statements: we don't want to do something "For the beginning" and later differently.

So we also need to decide reference counting first.

  struct _KeyData data = keyDataNew (value, size);
  keyDataIncRef (data);
  key->data = data;
}

static void keyDel(Key * key) {
  keyDataDecRef (key->data);
  keyDataDel (key->data);
  // [...] other cleanup
}
```

#### Variation 1 - RcBuffer

Instead of using different structs for `_KeyData`, and `_KeyName` use a more generic struct for reference counting.
This would avoid some duplication on the reference counting code for the key.
Keysets will still have their own data struct, as it contains more than just a pointer and a size.

```c
typedef struct {
	void * data;
	size_t size;
	uint16_t refs;
} RcBuffer;

struct _Key {
	RcBuffer * uname;
	RcBuffer * ename; // will be removed soon
	RcBuffer * value;
	
	KeySet * meta;
	keyflag_t flags;
	uint16_t refs;
};
```

#### Possible Edge Cases

In general, it should be possible to always do copy-on-write.
From a users perspective, copy-on-write copies of a key (and a keyset) should behave the same.
There is, however, one edge case: the user modifying the value of a key directly.
This is shown in the following example:

```c
Key * key;
struct foo myFoo = {
  .x = 0
};
keySetBinary (key, &myFoo, sizeof(myFoo));

Key * dup = keyDup (key);

> ((struct foo *)keyValue (key))->x = 1;

Reviewer: This is undefined behavior, the memory returned by `keyValue` must not be modified. This can be simply added as constraint.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it is technically undefined behaviour, but the cast from `const void *` returned by `keyValue` to `struct foo *` is suspicious. However, this code _currently_ works. Therefore, the decision should address it.

// with COW
assert (((struct foo *)keyValue (dup))->x == 1);
// without COW
assert (((struct foo *)keyValue (dup))->x == 0);
```

> This edge case can be accounted for by providing a function, i.e. `keyDetach`, that forces that the key has its very own copy of the data.

Reviewer: I don't think we need this.

Reviewer 2: The function is not just for this case, but for the general case, when you want a non-COW copy for whatever reason. However, I did already say that I'd probably put the function into `libelektra-extras` or similar, if we add it at all, since it would just be something like:

```c
// WARNING: pseudo-code, actual code slightly more complicated
static inline void keyDetach (Key * key) {
    keySetName (key, keyName (key));
    keySetValue (key, keyValue (key));
    // maybe do something for metadata, but I don't think it's needed
}
```

Author: No, we need this. During the implementation I had to create such functions for both Key and KeySet to avoid code duplication. We can argue whether or not they should be part of the public API though.

Reviewer 2: To come to a conclusion here:

We can leave the note in the file. It just says this would be a possible solution for the edge case. It doesn't say that we will introduce this.

Whether we do need it can be discussed in the PR implementing everything, where we see the code. If we really do need it, we can then discuss whether we make it public API and via which library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This edge case can be accounted for by providing a private function `keyDetach()`, that forces that the key has its very own copy of the data.
```

Yes, let us introduce it as private API and we can later decide if it must be public if we know more about the use cases of Elektra's API.

We can then document that the user has to call `keyDetach` when she wants to modify the value directly.

```c
((struct foo *)keyValue (keyDetach(key)))->x = 1;

// with COW
assert (((struct foo *)keyValue (dup))->x == 0);
// without COW
assert (((struct foo *)keyValue (dup))->x == 0);
```

#### Possible Optimizations

- This approach requires more allocations than previously.
  We have not fully benchmarked whether this is a big issue.
  One optimization could be an expanding "pool" of `_KeySetData`, `_KeyData` and `_KeyName`.
  We could then allocate multiple of them at the same time, and borrow and give back instance from and to the pool.

- Embed the `KeySet * meta` directly in `struct _Key`.
  This may help with performance in cases we need metadata.
  It will, however, increase memory usage.

>   This should only be considered after some benchmarking shows this is a real issue.

Reviewer: Exactly, I don't think this needs further investigations now.

- Example Key + 2 Duplicates: three instances of the key defined above, two of them are duplications of the first

| Approach                                                          | Empty Key | Empty Key (with name) | Empty Key (with name + data) | Single Example Key | Example Key + 1 Duplicate | Example Key + 2 Duplicates |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------|----------:|----------------------:|-----------------------------:|-------------------:|--------------------------:|---------------------------:|
| Current Implementation                                            |        64 |                    64 |                           64 |                153 |                       306 |                        459 |
| mmapstorage-like COW implementation (without additional pointers) |        64 |                    64 |                           64 |                153 |                       217 |                        281 |
| mmapstorage-like COW implementation (with additional pointers)    |        80 |                    80 |                           80 |                169 |                       249 |                        329 |

> | Full-blown COW implementation                                     |        32 |                    72 |                           96 |                185 |                       217 |                        249 |

Author: The have a name ... It's the same as the section titles in "Considered Alternatives"

> | Full-blown COW implementation                                     |        32 |                    72 |                           96 |                185 |                       217 |                        249 |

Reviewer: I understood that this was the idea but I cannot navigate easily between the different variants. Maybe a table of contents would also solve my issue.
